README.md, before:

# Raspberry Pi MCP Server

A hardware smart hub using Raspberry Pi and the Model Context Protocol. Control infrared devices and sensors through natural language using Claude Desktop, ChatGPT, or custom agents.

Extensible architecture allows easy addition of new tools, resources, and prompts for testing and expansion.

Written in Python, using FastMCP framework.

## Prerequisites

- Raspberry Pi 4 (arm64)
- Raspberry Pi OS installed with SSH enabled
- If using pre written tools will need the following
  - IR Sensor and Transmitter
  - Photo Sensor
  - Humidity Sensor
  - A smart plug device

## Initial Setup

### 1. Configure Raspberry Pi

```bash
# Enable Avahi for .local hostname resolution, so we can connect with ssh to the pi without using the ip address
sudo apt install -y avahi-daemon
sudo systemctl enable avahi-daemon
sudo systemctl start avahi-daemon

# Install and start pigpio daemon (required for IR timing)
sudo apt install -y pigpio
sudo systemctl enable pigpiod
sudo systemctl start pigpiod
```

### 2. Development Environment Setup

```bash
# On your local machine
pipx install uv
uv python pin 3.12
uv sync --python 3.12
```

## Deployment Options

### Docker Deployment

Build and deploy the containerized server:

```bash
# Set your Pi password
export PI_PASSWORD='your_password'

# Deploy using the provided script, default image name in script is mcppi:v2
./deploy.sh
```

The deployment script handles:
- Building ARM64 Docker image using dockerx
- Transferring to Raspberry Pi via ssh
- Starting container with privileged access for GPIO

## Claude Desktop Setup

To use this MCP server with Claude Desktop, you need to install the MCP remote client. MCP Remote is an interface that allows Claude Desktop to connect to remote MCP servers over HTTP.

### Prerequisites

- Node.js installed on your local machine

### Installation

Install mcp-remote globally:

```bash
npm install -g mcp-remote
```

See [mcp-remote](https://github.com/geelen/mcp-remote) for more details.

### Configuration

Add the following to your Claude Desktop MCP configuration file:

**macOS**: `~/Library/Application Support/Claude/claude_desktop_config.json`
**Windows**: `%APPDATA%\Claude\claude_desktop_config.json`

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "mcppi": {
      "command": "npx",
      "args": ["mcp-remote", "http://mcppi.local:8000/mcp", "--allow-http"]
    }
  }
}
```

Restart Claude Desktop after updating the configuration.

### Example Claude Desktop Interactions

Once configured, you can interact with the MCP server through Claude Desktop using natural language:

**List available tools and schemas:**
```
List the MCP tools available and the schemas
```

![MCP Tools and Schemas](images/claude_mcp_with_schema.png)

**Read humidity sensor:**
```
Read the humidity with mcp pi
```

![Read Humidity Sensor](images/claude_read_humidity.png)

**Read photo sensor:**
```
Read the photo sensor
```

![Read Photo Sensor](images/claude_photo_sensor.png)

## Testing Without Claude

The `agents/client.py` is an HTTP Stream client for testing the server without Claude Desktop.

## Device Registration Workflow

Interact with the MCP server using natural language through your MCP client (e.g., Claude Desktop). The server exposes tools that can be called conversationally.

### 1. Plan Device Operations

Ask the MCP to get mapping guidance for your device type. This calls the `GetMappingGuidance` tool:

"What operations should I map for a fan?"

Returns suggested operations like `speed_up`, `speed_down`, `power_on`, etc.

### 2. Start IR Listener

Tell the MCP to start listening for IR signals. This calls the `StartIRListener` tool:

"Start the IR listener"

The listener automatically monitors GPIO 27 and captures signal timing data.

![Start IR Listener](images/start_ir_listener.png)

### 3. Capture IR Signals

Press buttons on your remote in this order:
1. Required operations first: `power_on`, `power_off`
2. Optional operations next: `speed_up`, `speed_down`, etc.

The signals should automatically be received.

### 4. Register Device Mappings

Instruct the MCP to register your device with the captured signals in the order the buttons were pressed. This calls the `SubmitMappings` tool:

"Submit the mappings for the living room fan, I pressed power on, power off, speed up, and speed down in the last 2 minutes."

The tool matches captured signals to operations in chronological order. Device configuration is saved to `/home/pi/.raspberry-mcp/devices.json`.

![Submit Device Mappings](images/submit_mappings.png)

### 5. Clear IR Events

There is also an option to clear IR events if we want to start fresh and start listening again.

"Clear the IR events" will clear the events from the IR listener.

![Clear IR Events](images/clear_ir_events.png)

## Device Control

Once devices are registered, control them through natural language commands to the MCP.

### Send Commands

Tell the MCP to control your device. This calls the `SendIRCommand` tool:

"Turn on the living room fan"

Transmits IR signal via GPIO 17 at 38kHz with 78% duty cycle, repeated 5x for reliability.

![Send IR Command](images/send_ir_command.png)

### List Available Operations

Ask the MCP what operations are available. This calls the `ListDeviceOperations` tool:

"What can I do with the living room fan?"

### Troubleshoot IR Issues

Request troubleshooting if commands aren't working. This calls the `TroubleshootIR` tool:

"Troubleshoot the power_on command for the living room fan"

Tests different power levels and frequencies to identify transmission issues.

## Available Tools

- `GetMappingGuidance` - Get button suggestions for device types
- `StartIrListener` / `StopIrListener` - Capture IR signals
- `SubmitMappings` - Register device with operations
- `SendIRCommand` - Control any registered device
- `ListDeviceOperations` - Show available operations for each device
- `TroubleshootIR` - Test different power levels and frequencies

## Available Operations

**Required**: `power_on`, `power_off`

**Common**: `speed_up`, `speed_down`, `oscillate`, `volume_up`, `volume_down`, `temp_up`, `temp_down`, `auto_mode`

Use `ListDeviceOperations` to see what's available for each device.

## Architecture Overview

### Core Components

- `IRListenerManager`: Singleton service handling IR signal capture using pigpio callbacks with hardware-precise timing
- `ir_event_controls.py`: IR transmission functions supporting NEC, Sony, and generic protocols
- `device_registry.py`: Device configuration persistence

### Signal Processing

1. GPIO callback captures pulse timing data
2. Signal completion detected after 200ms timeout
3. Protocol detection (NEC/Sony) or generic hash-based encoding
4. Storage with normalized timing patterns for replay

### MCP Integration

- `server.py`: FastMCP server with HTTP transport
- `ToolService`: Automatic tool registration and schema generation
- CORS enabled for cross-origin access

## Verification

Ask the MCP to check the listener status to verify signal capture:

"What's the status of the IR listener?"

Request a transmitter test to verify hardware functionality:

"Test the IR transmitter"

## Notes

- All IR timing uses pigpio for microsecond precision
- Docker container requires `--privileged` flag for GPIO access
- Device mappings persist across restarts
- Pattern matching temporarily disabled to prevent false positives

Commit message:

major refactoring to cleanup directory and code structure, making ac control simulation only

README.md, after:

# Raspberry Pi MCP Server

A hardware smart hub using Raspberry Pi and the Model Context Protocol. Control infrared devices and sensors through natural language using Claude Desktop, ChatGPT, or custom agents.

Extensible architecture allows easy addition of new tools, resources, and prompts for testing and expansion.

Written in Python, using FastMCP framework.

## Prerequisites

**Required:**
- Raspberry Pi 4 (arm64)
- Raspberry Pi OS installed with SSH enabled
- Docker and Python 3.12+

**Optional (for included hardware tools):**
- IR receiver (GPIO 27) and IR LED transmitter (GPIO 17) for infrared device control
- DHT22 temperature/humidity sensor (GPIO 17)
- Photo sensor (GPIO 27)
- Shelly smart plug (for AC control examples)

## Initial Setup

### 1. Configure Raspberry Pi

```bash
# Enable Avahi for .local hostname resolution, so we can connect with ssh to the pi without using the ip address
sudo apt install -y avahi-daemon
sudo systemctl enable avahi-daemon
sudo systemctl start avahi-daemon

# Install and start pigpio daemon (required for IR timing)
sudo apt install -y pigpio
sudo systemctl enable pigpiod
sudo systemctl start pigpiod
```

### 2. Development Environment Setup

```bash
# On your local machine
pipx install uv
uv python pin 3.12
uv sync --python 3.12
```

## Deployment Options

### Docker Deployment

Build and deploy the containerized server:

```bash
# Set your Pi password
export PI_PASSWORD='your_password'

# Deploy using the provided script, default image name in script is mcppi:v2
./deploy.sh
```

The deployment script handles:
- Building ARM64 Docker image using dockerx
- Transferring to Raspberry Pi via ssh
- Starting container with privileged access for GPIO

## Claude Desktop Setup

To use this MCP server with Claude Desktop, you need to install the MCP remote client. MCP Remote is an interface that allows Claude Desktop to connect to remote MCP servers over HTTP.

### Prerequisites

- Node.js installed on your local machine

### Installation

Install mcp-remote globally:

```bash
npm install -g mcp-remote
```

See [mcp-remote](https://github.com/geelen/mcp-remote) for more details.

### Configuration

Add the following to your Claude Desktop MCP configuration file:

**macOS**: `~/Library/Application Support/Claude/claude_desktop_config.json`
**Windows**: `%APPDATA%\Claude\claude_desktop_config.json`

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "mcppi": {
      "command": "npx",
      "args": ["mcp-remote", "http://mcppi.local:8000/mcp", "--allow-http"]
    }
  }
}
```

Restart Claude Desktop after updating the configuration.

### Example Claude Desktop Interactions

Once configured, you can interact with the MCP server through Claude Desktop using natural language:

**List available tools and schemas:**
```
List the MCP tools available and the schemas
```

![MCP Tools and Schemas](images/claude_mcp_with_schema.png)

**Read humidity sensor:**
```
Read the humidity with mcp pi
```

![Read Humidity Sensor](images/claude_read_humidity.png)

**Read photo sensor:**
```
Read the photo sensor
```

![Read Photo Sensor](images/claude_photo_sensor.png)

## Testing Without Claude

The `agents/client.py` is an HTTP Stream client for testing the server without Claude Desktop.

## Device Registration Workflow

Interact with the MCP server using natural language through your MCP client (e.g., Claude Desktop). The server exposes tools that can be called conversationally.

### 1. Plan Device Operations

Ask the MCP to get mapping guidance for your device type. This calls the `GetMappingGuidance` tool:

"What operations should I map for a fan?"

Returns suggested operations like `speed_up`, `speed_down`, `power_on`, etc.

### 2. Start IR Listener

Tell the MCP to start listening for IR signals. This calls the `StartIRListener` tool:

"Start the IR listener"

The listener automatically monitors GPIO 27 and captures signal timing data.

![Start IR Listener](images/start_ir_listener.png)

### 3. Capture IR Signals

Press buttons on your remote in this order:
1. Required operations first: `power_on`, `power_off`
2. Optional operations next: `speed_up`, `speed_down`, etc.

The signals should automatically be received.

### 4. Register Device Mappings

Instruct the MCP to register your device with the captured signals in the order the buttons were pressed. This calls the `SubmitMappings` tool:

"Submit the mappings for the living room fan, I pressed power on, power off, speed up, and speed down in the last 2 minutes."

The tool matches captured signals to operations in chronological order. Device configuration is saved to `/home/pi/.raspberry-mcp/devices.json`.

![Submit Device Mappings](images/submit_mappings.png)

### 5. Clear IR Events

There is also an option to clear IR events if we want to start fresh and start listening again.

"Clear the IR events" will clear the events from the IR listener.

![Clear IR Events](images/clear_ir_events.png)

## Device Control

Once devices are registered, control them through natural language commands to the MCP.

### Send Commands

Tell the MCP to control your device. This calls the `SendIRCommand` tool:

"Turn on the living room fan"

Transmits IR signal via GPIO 17 at 38kHz with 78% duty cycle, repeated 5x for reliability.

![Send IR Command](images/send_ir_command.png)

### List Available Operations

Ask the MCP what operations are available. This calls the `ListDeviceOperations` tool:

"What can I do with the living room fan?"

### Troubleshoot IR Issues

Request troubleshooting if commands aren't working. This calls the `TroubleshootIR` tool:

"Troubleshoot the power_on command for the living room fan"

Tests different power levels and frequencies to identify transmission issues.

## Available Tools

- `GetMappingGuidance` - Get button suggestions for device types
- `StartIrListener` / `StopIrListener` - Capture IR signals
- `SubmitMappings` - Register device with operations
- `SendIRCommand` - Control any registered device
- `ListDeviceOperations` - Show available operations for each device
- `TroubleshootIR` - Test different power levels and frequencies

## Available Operations

**Required**: `power_on`, `power_off`

**Common**: `speed_up`, `speed_down`, `oscillate`, `volume_up`, `volume_down`, `temp_up`, `temp_down`, `auto_mode`

Use `ListDeviceOperations` to see what's available for each device.

## Architecture Overview

### Core Components

- `IRListenerManager`: Singleton service handling IR signal capture using pigpio callbacks with hardware-precise timing
- `ir_event_controls.py`: IR transmission functions supporting NEC, Sony, and generic protocols
- `device_registry.py`: Device configuration persistence

### Signal Processing

1. GPIO callback captures pulse timing data
2. Signal completion detected after 200ms timeout
3. Protocol detection (NEC/Sony) or generic hash-based encoding
4. Storage with normalized timing patterns for replay

### MCP Integration

- `server.py`: FastMCP server with HTTP transport
- `ToolService`: Automatic tool registration and schema generation
- CORS enabled for cross-origin access

## Verification

Ask the MCP to check the listener status to verify signal capture:

"What's the status of the IR listener?"

Request a transmitter test to verify hardware functionality:

"Test the IR transmitter"

## Notes

- All IR timing uses pigpio for microsecond precision
- Docker container requires `--privileged` flag for GPIO access
- Device mappings persist across restarts
- Pattern matching temporarily disabled to prevent false positives
